#Statistical Control in Multiplicative Interaction Models

*Jens Olav Dahlgaard and Martin Vinæs Larsen*

Used to explore effect heterogeneity and test conditional causal theories, linear regression models with multiplicative interaction terms are common in both experimental and observational political science research. In this paper, we show that when adding controls to a model with an interaction term, these do not effectively hold constant the two interacted variables. Instead, the estimated interaction effect can still be confounded by the controls included in the model. If, for instance, one wants to examine how the effect of an experimental treatment in a survey experiment varies with education level, and include a linear control for age in the interaction model, we show that the model will *not* be able to give you an unbiased estimate of the difference in treatment effects across levels of education holding age constant. We demonstrate that this simple conclusion has important implications for how one can interpret a wide-range of empirical applications of models where multiplicative interaction terms are used, such as unit fixed effects models in Time Series Cross Sectional data and moderation analysis experimental data.

This is an important conclusion, because it upends conventional wisdom about how to interpret statistical control in linear models with interaction terms. As such, surveying recent research in the American Political Science Review, the American Journal of Political Science and the Journal of Politics, we find that existing work routinely misunderstands how statistical control works in models with a multiplicative interaction term. We end the paper by giving some recommendations for how to draw appropriate inferences when using statisical control in models with an interaction term.


